Nitrogen is essential to all living things on Earth. It is the 4th most abundant element in the human body. We get nitrogen from eating plants, which they get from the soil. However, every  harvest, the nitrogen from the soil is depleted. Less nitrogen means lower yields.

For a long time, people heavily relied on bird poop "guano" for nitrogen. This was expensive; but more importantly, the supply of it is already running out by 1870s. Another method was needed to be done to get more nitrogen or else people around the globe will be dying of starvation.

78% of the Earth's atmosphere is nitrogen. There's a lot of nitrogen to go around, so what's the problem? Well, it's in its unusable form. Nitrogen gas is composed of two triple-bonded nitrogen atoms. Breaking this bond would take a massive amount of energy.

This is where chemists needed to step up. Many chemists tried and failed. That is, until Fritz Haber managed to make Ammonia (NH3)--a compound also found on bird poop-- after working tirelessly on the problem for 5 years. His idea was to combine nitrogen and hydrogen gas and nitrogen gas in extreme pressure and extreme temperature. To do this, new technology were made that can withstand such heat and pressure.

Thanks to Haber's discovery, harvest yields grew exponentially. Billions more of people on Earth can now be supported. This is arguably one of the most important discoveries in the history. He received a Nobel Prize for chemistry in 1918.

Happy ending?
V

After Haber's discovery of ammonia, he helped in World War I. Ammonium nitrate, which can be sythesized by combining ammonia and nitric acid, while a rich fertilizer, was a key ingredient in the explosive TNT (Trinitrotoluene). The fact that it takes a huge amount of energy to break the bond between nitrogen atoms, means that also a huge amount of energy is released when nitrogen atoms combine.

The massive Beirut explosion that occured on August 2020 was due to the storage of a large amount of ammonium nitrate. It killed 218 people, injured 7000, and left 300,000 homeless.

"You either die a hero, or live long enough to see yourself become the villain." -Batman, The Dark Knight

Haber then spent his time working on poison gas research. He came up with chlorine gas, very deadly even in low doses. After the World War I, his institute made an insecticide. This insecticde was then used to perpetrate the Holocaust.

To this day, we are still experiencing the negatives of ammonia synthesis: increase in water and air pollution; the perturbation of greenhouse-gas levels and the loss of biodiversity that was the result from the colossal increase in ammonia production
